[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Thanks
for joining me today
in the Gaiam Studios
in Boulder, Colorado.
I'm your host, Regina Meredith.
Throughout the several years
and hundreds of interviews
I've done with the brightest
people of our times,
there has been one subject
that seems to dog all of us--
money.
As many of us strive
to advance ourselves
on a psychological
and spiritual level
through meditation, yoga,
prayer, and other practices,
we're instantly
taken down into fear
when money reenters
our awareness.
Could it be that there is
something systematically
wrong in our money matrix
that keeps us essentially
enslaved to its scarcity?
Today's guest, Stephen
Belgin, would answer yes.
Stephen would also
say that we can
heal ourselves and our societies
with the flip of a switch.
His is a story of hope,
forgiveness, and redemption.
And I have to say that--
I don't want to
embarrass you, Stephen,
but Stephen is one of the most
fascinating people I've ever
met in my entire lifetime.
And Bernard Lietaer--
>>>STEPHEN BELGIN: One of the
great teachers I've ever had
the pleasure and the blessing
to be involved with, yes.
>>REGINA: And we need
to talk about who
he is because this is
really central to the book
that the two of you have written
called "New Money for a New
World," which I
have to praise you.
This is an incredible
work that I
think everybody should have in
their possession because this
is a subject that
confounds all of us
and create such
pain on the planet.
And you're really
showing us a way out.
So why didn't you tell us,
first of all, who Bernard is
and why he is central to this
story and how the two of you
came together.
>>BELGIN: Well, Bernard has
a very interesting history.
But in essence, he started
working in systems.
He had his master's degree,
I think, from the MIT
and he was then brought
in, he wrote a paper
while he was in MIT about money.
And he started
making predictions
based on his understanding
of systems, not economics,
about how money works
and how that affects
the economies of the world.
And he started
making predictions
while he was at MIT about the
Latin-American crisis that
was looming that nobody else
was actually looking at.
>>REGINA: What time frame
that we're looking at there?
>>BELGIN: This is the 1970s.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>BELGIN: OK, and because of
his understanding of systems,
he applied that to
money, not economics.
And was through
that that he came
to understand that a lot
of what we call economics
is actually a monetary issue.
And so from that, he was
able to predict things
that nobody else was able to see
and he built a career on that.
In the 1980s, he was approached
by members of the EU and others
to help construct
a new currency,
a supranational currency.
>>REGINA: Which is making
headline news every day
right now.
>>BELGIN: Correct.
>>REGINA: It's in trouble.
>>BELGIN: It's in
trouble but all
of the national currencies
in our world are, in a sense,
in trouble.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>BELGIN: So he made these--
he started working on the ECU,
the European Conversion Unit,
which then became the Euro.
And it was during this time
that he was working on the ECU
that he started making new
observations about money,
again, from a
structural of systems
point of view which has led to
the work we're both doing now.
>>REGINA: Because
some people call him
the architect behind the Euro.
>>BELGIN: Well, in a
sense, that's true.
I mean, it was actually the ECU.
It wasn't the Euro itself
but it did become the Euro.
>>REGINA: It became Euro.
>>BELGIN: That's right.
>>REGINA: So you have
a lifetime of really
not only a passionate
interest in understanding
how money works, but
also it was because it
was a source of great
stress in your own life
when you were a child.
And it's such a touching story.
I'd really like it if you
could go ahead and share
what happened when you were
very young, the way you grew up,
what happened with your father.
And I'll prompt you if you
don't get to the other part
that I really like.
>>BELGIN: Well, I grew up
in the '50s and the '60s
in New York, Brooklyn.
My father, he was one
of those many people
that grew up during the
Depression, my father
and mother.
He started working
at the age of eight,
before school, 4:00
in the morning,
making bakery deliveries.
After school, he would
work another full time job.
And by the time he
was, I think, 12 or 13,
he left school altogether
and worked full time,
seven days a week.
This is during the Depression.
So that period for me is alive.
I understand some
of what happened
during that period through
what my parents went through.
My father, at the age of 35,
had his first heart attack
because of all the work we
believe that he went through.
And he died in my
arms at the age of 49.
I was 18, he was 49, after
his ninth heart attack.
>>REGINA: Ninth
heart attack, wow.
That's a lot of game
that would create that.
>>BELGIN: And so my
family were always
looking at these problems
around money, and health care,
and all of these issues.
So that's what I grew up with.
And it had an impact on me.
And yes--
>>REGINA: I was going to say
tell what happened when you
were eight years
old, though, when--
>>BELGIN: Well,
my father-- yeah,
after his first heart attack, he
came home after several months
at the hospital.
And I don't know if
I said this overtly
or it was something
I said to myself
but I knew that there
was a connection
between the Depression,
my father's health care,
and what went on with him.
And I remember,
it's only recently
after the book was
completed that I remembered
making this promise to
myself that somehow I
would try to do something about
this money thing that was going
on, not just for my
father and my mother,
but for many of the people
that I grew up with.
We all had these
issues around money.
>>REGINA: And you
were eight years old.
>>BELGIN: I was eight years old.
>>REGINA: That was the
planting of a seed that
would become what someone
called darimar or life path.
>>BELGIN: Looking
back, I'd have to say
that that is exactly what
happened my whole life now
that I can look back at it,
so much of what happened,
there's a rhythm to it, there's
a kind of tapestry to it
all that I simply did not
understand until recently.
I was writing this
book for years
and asking myself
how it was that I
came to write with Bernard
on a subject like this.
Because money for me was always
a sense of confusion as well.
I never quite understood it.
In fact, I tried to
stay away from it
because it would seem like such
a large huge issue that was
beyond anybody's comprehension.
But over the years,
I met several people
that pointed me
in directions that
allowed me to see kind
of beneath the cover what
was going on.
And certainly, the foremost
of those was Bernard.
>>REGINA: Yes, well,
let's go back a little bit
into childhood
because you grew up
in a neighborhood that was what
most would consider very rough.
There was a lot of
poverty, but there
were some pockets of wealth.
It happened to be
amongst the mob that was
a big part of your community.
The Italian mob was very
present there and others.
>>BELGIN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And when we
were talking off camera,
you shared something with me
that I thought was fascinating.
We all have our idea
through Hollywood,
and novels, Mario Puzo, and
so forth, what the mob is.
And I think even
through that, we
get these reflections
of loyalty.
But you say it extended
even beyond that
in your neighborhood.
When people were in
trouble and needed help,
the help came from
them oftentimes.
>>BELGIN: Oftentimes,
I mean, it came
from many different directions.
There was-- I must say that
going back to that period
and especially in
Brooklyn at that time,
there seemed to be
a community sense.
We took care of one another.
The neighborhood took
care of one another.
When children,
myself included, when
we'd misbehave on the streets,
it didn't matter who it was.
They were all of our--
all these people in
neighborhood were our parents.
And we get whacked on the
back of the head by anybody.
>>REGINA: But when your
family was in trouble,
someone came around,
someone of wealth
and position came around and
handed you a wad of money.
>>BELGIN: That's right.
That's right.
I mean, you know, again, I don't
want to glorify that help--
>>REGINA: No, I understand.
>>BELGIN: But on another level,
again, we all knew each other.
You know, everybody
was connected
in one way or another.
And when people were in
trouble, others came.
Those they could, came
about and gave help,
gave assistance
to the rest of us.
And I remember, my father had
just had a second heart attack
and news spread, and one
of the tough guys from
the neighborhood saw me sitting
in front of my house one day,
he just came over and he
just hands me a little paper
envelope-- actually,
a paper bag--
and it had a lot bills and he
said, take care of your family.
And I've never forgotten that.
>>REGINA: No.
Because that-- the reason I
wanted you to bring it up,
I'm not trying to glorify
the cause of this or anything
either.
But what I'm saying
is, from all quarters,
people took care of each other.
And money, you began
to understand money
in a very different way
than most people would,
because in your
average neighborhood,
someone doesn't come around
with a paper bag full of money
and help you when your
family's in trouble.
So you were starting
to see glimpses
into money and the underside of
money then even from that age.
>>BELGIN: I did.
I mean, so many of the
activities that took place back
then--
look, most of the people
there were hardworking, lower
and middle class,
we're poor people
but working through the
system to make a better
life for themselves.
And most of the kids, they went
on to high school, college,
and beyond that.
Very many successful people
from that neighborhood.
But there was another
element to it as well.
I mean, we were all
becoming somewhat aware
that the system, the global
system, or the national system
was a hard system.
It wasn't working for everybody.
You had to really work
hard, and most people did,
but we all look to those
that have the money
and have made success.
And some of the people
who were successful
were doing things that
we're not completely legal.
And I got to see the underside,
the underbelly of what
money was like, and what was--
how it worked within our area,
and also on a national level
because a lot of
these people went on
to work on a very
successful national level--
>>REGINA: Some large projects.
>>BELGIN: --some large projects
and a number of the people
that I knew, they were working
to develop Atlantic City.
And I watched this.
I mean, I watched people working
hard making minimal money,
people breaking this system
and actually some of them
doing quite well.
And it gave mixed messages.
>>REGINA: Yeah, what
did that teach you?
>>BELGIN: What most of what my
early experiences around money
taught me was that it
wasn't as well constructed
as people were telling us.
We were being told, you work
hard, you do this, you do that,
and you're going to make
a success of your life.
At the same time, I
saw so many people
breaking the rules
of the system,
doing far better than others.
And what it allowed me
to start feeling into
was the sense that
these systems--
be it the monetary system,
the economic system,
other systems--
were not as clearly well-defined
and just not as well-thought
out as the propaganda
around that suggested.
That there were many instances
where these systems did not
really fulfill their promise.
And as we now know, you
know, 50, 60 years later,
there's so many holes
within that framework.
>>REGINA: The system seems
to be dying and it's just--
>>BELGIN: Well, in a sense--
>>REGINA: --collapsing.
>>BELGIN: --collapsing in a
sense, but in another way,
you know, I see
it also as a gift.
And the gift being that
we're being revealed
in a very dramatic
way, but we're
being revealed the
inconsistencies and the things
that we need to attend to now.
People are up in arms
about the industrial model
and our monetary system,
but we should also
keep in mind that
with all of its faults
or whatever you
want to refer that
to as, with all of the things
that we need to address,
it's also served
us in many ways.
And so what I'd like to see is
a mature conversation about what
it is that we want to hold
on to as we move forward
and include and transcend
our current model by bringing
in other tools that will
allow us to address what needs
to happen in our
postmodern journey,
but also to hold on to what
it is that actually does work
in the age we're coming out of.
>>REGINA: And mature
conversations are beginning.
And certainly, your
book should span
a lot of more
mature conversations
around the subject.
>>BELGIN: I hope.
>>REGINA: And one
of the things, as I
was reading this
book, that struck me
which you do a brilliant job
of going back historically--
but you also get into some very
spiritual components of what
money is all about.
You get into masculine
and feminine principles
of money and where
we took a wrong turn.
And so I would like
to go ahead and launch
into some of the historical
perspective of societies that
were working very
well because they
were using a number of
tools, not just one tool.
>>BELGIN: Yes.
>>REGINA: And you do talk
about this in your book.
It's quite cute.
You have a community called
Hammer Ville and a community
called Money Ville that are
parallel to each other which
is how do you construct
an entire community
and everything that it stands
for and offers the people
with only one tool, a hammer.
And you're saying
likewise, how do
you construct a
culture, global cultures
around the world
with one tool which
is using a national currency.
>>BELGIN: In fact, our
national currencies--
I mean, we tend to think of
the common way of thinking
about it as we have a yen, we
have dollar, we have the euro,
we have other types of
currencies from each nation.
And we tend to think of
them as different tools,
but they're not.
They're all banked at
fiat-based, interest-bearing
currencies.
And they all function
in a very similar way.
And so what we have
is a virtual monopoly
of the use of these
one type of currencies,
the national
currencies, and they
are the monetary
equivalent of a hammer.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>BELGIN: And what is really
not appreciated today,
and actually not known
by many people today,
is that we actually have a
full assortment of tools,
monetary tools that
are available to us.
We have the equivalent
of monetary paint brushes
and screwdrivers.
We have all these other
tools, and we're not
using them because we're
simply unaware of that.
And with this full assortment
of a monetary tool box,
so much more is possible.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And not only that, when you're
dealing with essentially fiat
currencies globally, then you're
open to a lot of manipulation.
Since it's all
there to begin with,
it can be manipulated
as we're watching.
>>BELGIN: Yes.
>>REGINA: We're watching that
on the stock market, globally.
We're seeing this
with certainly metals,
you know, the fixing of prices
on some of the precious metals
and other commodities.
>>BELGIN: Yes.
>>REGINA: And it can
all be done essentially
because we have fiat currencies
at the base of everything,
right?
>>BELGIN: Well,
that's what our--
>>REGINA: These are real--
>>BELGIN: Yes, I
mean, the research
shows us that it's
actually most of the issues
that we're dealing with today
in our world, many of which
don't appear to be linked to
money in any particular way,
are in fact all linked
to this virtual monopoly
of national currencies,
the use of one hammer,
one type of tool when
most of the problems
can be so quickly
alleviated by making use
of these other monetary tools.
>>REGINA: We have people
starving all over the planet,
people who don't have
access to electricity,
almost a majority of the
people on the planet.
And yet, as you say, these tools
not only are available to us
now if we choose to
employ them, but they've
been there historically.
And let's go back into--
are you comfortable maybe
going back into Egyptian times
because, here, we have
this historical perspective
of the lives of the
average person in Egypt,
which is you are
probably a slave,
pulling something over your
back, starving to death.
And that is the
notion of what life
was like in Egyptian times.
When in fact, it's appearing
with one small exception which
we kind of, we don't
need to go into.
That wasn't the case at all.
>>BELGIN: No, it was not.
In fact, in many ways--
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about it.
>>BELGIN: --in many ways,
the ancient Egyptians,
dynastic Egypt from--
we don't know the exact dates--
>>REGINA: The middle kingdoms.
>>BELGIN: But yeah, the middle
kingdom anywhere from 1500
BC to a specific
date, which is 30 AD,
and I'll go into
what that was about.
But for the better
part of 2,000 years,
Egypt had the most enviable
economy of the ancient world
as far as we know.
The average person
lived, well, let's say
they lived as well, if not
better, than as we lived today.
They had three to
four meals every day
from what we can tell, that
these construction workers
that were building some of
the great works of the period.
Most of them were
not slaves, they
were actually very well-paid.
We have archeological evidence
that at least in some cases,
there was brain surgery,
eye surgery for the workers.
There were three to
four meals a day.
They lived in extraordinary
circumstances.
They worked anywhere
from three to four days
a week, in some cases, and
had plenty of holidays.
We don't know about
the slavery issue.
We know that in earlier times,
there were cases of slavery.
But during the period that we're
looking at, most of the workers
were highly paid and the
economy worked in such a way
that from what we
can tell, there
was very little evidence
of any poverty whatsoever.
Most of the people were
either middle class
or high class, upper class.
And the same thing
happened in a period that's
just now beginning
to be understood,
and it was a period of 250
years in the central Middle
Ages, where exactly the
same thing happened,
where the people were getting
three to four meals a day.
They, in some cases, had
150 days of holidays a year.
>>REGINA: I know,
that's amazing.
>>BELGIN: And then
in one case, we
have written records that when
the lords of a certain region
in Western France were trying
to get the workers to work
eight hours a day and five
days a week, they revolted.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BELGIN: We're not doing that.
>>REGINA: They were like, we're
not going be on a six-hour work
day.
>>BELGIN: You know,
here we are today,
several thousand years later or
in the case of central Middle
Ages, 1,000 years later,
and we can't figure out
how to employ people when you
had nearly full employment.
Not only full employment
during the central Middle
Ages, 1,000 years earlier.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BELGIN: But people
actually didn't even
know what to do with
themselves after a while
and they started getting
involved in these public work
projects.
Not because they
needed the work,
because it was an
expression of who they were
and the consciousness
of the time.
>>REGINA: And if we go
back for a moment because I
want to go into some
detail on that era.
If we go back into
Egypt, they even had,
very similarly to what
you were just saying,
there was enough abundance.
And you can see by
the artifacts even
if you go to the various
Egyptian exhibits
at the British Museum,
the Louvre, and so forth
and the traveling
exhibits that they had--
there was, well,
certainly, this is
more of representing the royals,
but nonetheless, the quality
of life and workmanship and
artistry and parlor games
and everything were very highly
developed during this time.
>>BELGIN: It's extraordinary.
>>REGINA: And so they had
the first foreign aid.
>>BELGIN: That's right.
>>REGINA: They offered
the first foreign aid
regarding their crops and such.
Can you talk about
that a little bit?
I never--
>>BELGIN: We don't know a great
deal about it but we know that
there was, as you say, there was
such abundance in that country
that they started
thinking in ways that--
how do we help others?
Because their needs were
met, the requirements
of that society were met.
And what we came to
understand was, you know,
a lot of theory back in the
19th century scholarship
assumed that the economy
of Egypt at that period
was due to the gift of the Nile.
This fertile valley that
ran along the Nile River.
And that that was the reason for
their extraordinary abundance.
It's not.
Many areas of the world had--
>>REGINA: Equal, yeah.
>>BELGIN: Equal
or, if not, better.
What we've come to discover was
that they had a dual currency
system, both in ancient Egypt
and in the central Middle Ages.
And in fact, many different
flourishing economies
had this dual currency system.
And if I can go into that--
>>REGINA: Go into that and then
if you would also take that
into the notion of
demurrage, because I
found that fascinating.
>>BELGIN: So today, we have
these national currencies.
They had something equivalent
to a national currency
back then as well.
And they were used--
these national currencies
back then or the equivalent
thereof--
were used mostly for foreign
trade and for luxury items.
They actually had a disdain
for the use of gold.
They would laugh
at other societies
that were using gold
and accumulating
wealth in that sense.
For them money, was more a
way of exchanging energies,
talents, services, goods.
And unique to both--
not unique but a
particular feature
that went along with the
dual currency system,
both in ancient
Egypt, dynastic Egypt,
and in the central
Middle Ages, was
the use of a particular
type of money.
And remember earlier,
I was referring
to a monetary paintbrush.
Well, this is the
equivalent thereof.
Today, we have these
national currencies
with positive interest rates.
Well, back then, the
local currencies actually
had a negative interest rate.
Something we call a demurrage.
It's like a parking fee.
The longer you hold
onto a currency,
the more you have to
pay on that currency.
So what the incentive was,
was to use that currencies
immediately when you had it.
Like a hot potato,
you want to use that.
And what that did was
create a velocity--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>BELGIN: --of exchange.
And so somebody who is wealthy
had this demurrage currency,
they'd use it, then
they'd get rid of it.
And in the getting rid of
it, it would filter down
to other levels of
society and everybody
was interchanging,
interchanging,
and interchanging.
Sooner or later, most
of their basic needs
and some of the other needs
that they had were met.
And so you'd have
this exchange going on
instead of today's
scarcity of money,
and then taking that
scarce money model,
and then hoarding it or
putting it into the bank
and taking it out
of circulation.
They instead had a continuation.
>>REGINA: It makes
perfect sense.
Isn't that how it
should be used?
Well, we'll get into
that in a bit, but--
>>BELGIN: Well, I
would say quickly
that there's many uses of money.
The extraordinary thing here
is that because of our times,
we're used to using money in
one particular way and one
type of money.
And when you begin to realize
what money can actually do
and how many different varieties
of money are available to us
and they could be architected
for specific purposes
so that we could have
money to use specifically
for social issues.
We can have money to
take care of health care
that's designed specifically
for one type of health
care or another, for education.
For most of the
needs that we have,
we could design tools, monetary
tools that are specifically
designed to help us
address a specific issue.
Instead, what we have is this
200 or 300-year model which
was an extraordinary invention.
This industrial age money
that we're using today
was actually one of the,
if not the, major tools
that allowed the industrial
age to come into being.
So the monies that
we're using today
were specifically designed
to create industrialization.
They were designed for
the burgeoning nation
states that were
coming into being
several hundred years ago.
So that money
serves that purpose.
There are wonderful
commercial currency,
but there are
commercial currency.
And their specific
use was for those type
of activities that would help
us to become industrialized.
>>REGINA: Right
>>BELGIN: But they're
not designed very well,
and there's much better designs
for education, for other needs.
>>REGINA: And that was to
help us trade with each other.
>>BELGIN: Correct.
>>REGINA: Move
beyond our borders.
Not to take care of us on a
day-to-day bread and butter
basis per se.
>>BELGIN: No.
And there was a
limited understanding
of what money was
at that period,
and they did the best they
could to design a currency.
They had no idea at the
these national currencies
were coming into being.
I mean, it came into being in
basically late 1600s in England
and then it spread
around the world.
And we had no idea
back then that it
would become the currency
for all of humanity,
and that we'd have this
global financial system where
we're using just these hammers.
>>REGINA: The hammers.
>>BELGIN: These hammers.
>>REGINA: OK, let's
get to the Middle Ages,
back to the central Middle
Ages we're talking about just
for a moment earlier.
One of the things I found
so fascinating in your book
is, this was just an example
of the prosperity at the time,
and it seems that you can
look to historical artifacts
such as skeletal remains to
determine the size of people,
for example, which
would indicate
the caloric intake of the day.
To a large extent, there
may be other factors,
but to a large extent.
And the book is talking about
how the women in England--
it was in England, right?
>>BELGIN: Yes.
>>REGINA: Were 7
centimeters taller
than the women of
Victorian England,
which was a good
700 years later.
>>BELGIN: Yes.
>>REGINA: And it took
until, as I recall,
1998 before the women
of today caught up
in size with these women
from medieval times.
>>BELGIN: Well, this is for
me, you know, Bernard and I--
I'll speak for
myself, but I'd say
we're both these alpha males.
And when I got involved in this
monetary discovery or journey,
I was floored by the fact--
I was always, I mean,
most of my life,
I've been looking for that
web of interconnection.
How one thing is
related to another
linked to another, how
all of it comes together.
And I always thought
that if there
were a point where this
mega aha would happen,
that there'd be a linkage
between one component of who
we are and another.
The money, actually, led
to so many discoveries.
Most important that I think,
the fact that money is not value
neutral.
It has such an extraordinary
connection to who we are,
our world view.
And what's most
interesting to me
about both dynastic Egypt
and the central Middle Ages,
these were two periods in
which the feminine, the yin
principle, was honored at
such a high degree as compared
to both other societies
of their time,
and historically, its
other periods of history.
So in the central Middle Ages--
let's concentrate on that--
there was this flourishing of
the feminine at that period.
Most of the early understandings
of what we now call feminism
actually had its place
both in dynastic Egypt
and in the central Middle Ages.
The women, in particular,
were honored at a level
that we haven't seen
since that period.
We're beginning to
catch up to that today.
>>REGINA: They
own property, they
participated in many and
hundreds of different career
opportunities.
>>BELGIN: That's right.
And in ancient and dynastic
Egypt, even a few of the women
were pharaohs.
>>REGINA: Yes, and even
in a religious sense,
I believe it was in France--
>>BELGIN: That's right.
>>REGINA: --we would go to
the abbess for your blessing.
>>BELGIN: That's right,
where the women were--
>>REGINA: --blessing
of the abbot.
>>BELGIN: That's
right, and the women
were in charge of the abbess.
The abbots actually
worked for the abbess.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>BELGIN: So you have
so much happening.
You had women working in
most of the professions.
Now, this is wasn't
true, you know, globally
throughout all of Europe.
But in Western Europe and
in the areas we studied,
it certainly was the case.
And the bodily remains,
they were doing excavations
for a railroad system in London.
I forget exactly what year
was, in the '70s, I believe.
And they came across
this ancient graveyard
and they started
studying the remains.
And there was that these
women of that period, the men
and the women, of
that period were
taller than any other period
that we know of up until 1998.
We've just caught up
to their stature today.
>>REGINA: So you say 3,000
calories a day in the book is
what they were consuming,
which was probably--
>>BELGIN: Minimum.
>>REGINA: Yes, minimum.
That's a lot of food.
>>BELGIN: It's a lot of food.
>>REGINA: That means
there's a lot of production.
It means food was
abundant in all ways.
>>BELGIN: Historians today
are beginning to understand,
beginning to understand what
took place during that period.
But they're already calling
that period from about 1040,
1050, to 1290 in Western
Europe the first renaissance.
Actually, the first
true renaissance.
Most of the universities
came into being
of the university started coming
into being during that period,
a lot of extraordinary
technologies
came into being
during that period.
The wine production,
the food production,
so much was taking place.
But we, up until
recently, thought
of that entire millennium,
the medieval millennium,
as a dark period.
Well, this period, this 1040
to 1290, was anything but.
And again, so much
around the feminine
was beginning to take
place during that period.
>>REGINA: It was
also being expressed
through architecture, artwork.
I mean, you have
Notre Dame, Chartres--
>>BELGIN: Well--
>>REGINA: --you have many,
many magnificent edifices that
were built during this time.
And you say, this wasn't
because the church endowed it,
these were local projects.
>>BELGIN: Most of the great
cathedrals of Western Europe--
Notre Dame, Chartres, others--
came into being during this
period from 1040 to 1290,
and it was the greatest
period of construction
that we know of.
And these monuments
still stand today
as living testimony to
what can be accomplished.
And again, these churches,
these monasteries,
they came into being but they
were created not by the church.
They were created by the
local people and the way
they paid for it was
mostly through the use
of complementary currencies.
And they were built
as community projects,
and they were almost
competing with one another,
actually competing
with one another
to build the best cathedral
they could and they
were using these
local currencies to be
able to accomplish that.
And these projects went on for
generation after generation.
And there were
testimony not just
to the extraordinary
talents at that time,
but it was an enduring
testimony to the world view
and what can be accomplished
by rethinking money
and also by having that
feminine principle in play.
Many of the dual
currency systems
that we have in our world,
when we trace them back,
they traced back
to these cultures
that actually honor the feminine
along with the masculine.
And somehow, the
dual currency system
was an expression of that.
So here we are today,
1,000 years later,
the feminine is
reemerging in our world.
And here we are again, thinking
about money in a different way.
And I think it's
important to note
that most of the
ancient forms of money
were directly linked
by those people,
by those cultures
to the feminine.
Actually, to the great
mother archetype.
The word money itself comes from
the Roman goddess Juno Moneta.
And it was actually physically
in her womb, in her monument,
it was in the
basement of her place
that the money was
minted in Rome.
And it's not by accident.
Most of the ancient
forms of money
were considered to be, I mean,
the great mother archetype
was about the nurturing
of her children,
taking care of her children,
and taking care of the living
systems of this planet.
And money was seen back then
as an expression of her,
as a way for us to take
care of one another
and take care of ourselves,
and to nurture ourselves.
Money today is not
able to do that.
Again, using one
hammer, we're not
able to address the myriad
issues facing our world,
the diversity of our
global economic system,
all the different players with
their different world views.
To have one money that's a
commercial currency taking
care of all of that,
it's impossible.
>>REGINA: It is, and
it's not working.
And it's stopped
working back then too.
Let's talk about what happened
because as you mentioned
in your book, historically,
it's been thought
that all that prosperity and
productivity ended because
of the Black Plague, right?
>>BELGIN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: But you're saying
there was an intervening event
prior to that--
>>BELGIN: There was.
>>REGINA: --that really
was what took it all down.
And again, this is where
some of the shadow darkness
starts coming into the
whole subject of money
in more recent modern times.
What happened?
>>BELGIN: Well there was a
contraction in the late 1200s,
in France in particular,
and in other areas.
There started to become this
re-emergence of what I would
call an unhealthy patriarchy.
And there was the
consolidation of power.
Local lordships then got taken
over by regional king ships,
and there was a hierarchy
that came into being.
And one of the first things
that the king of France
did in the late 1200s
was that he nationalized
these local currencies.
He actually got rid
of the demurrage
currencies to a large
extent, almost entirely.
And they instituted
what we have today.
I mean, that type of
national currency system.
And in getting rid of
these local currencies,
and again, with the repression
of the feminine taking place
also during that period,
they happened yet again--
>>REGINA: All in position,
that burned at the stake.
>>BELGIN: But that
happened later on.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BELGIN: What they did was,
first, they nationalized
the currency, got rid
of the local currencies,
then they also devalued the
money in a particular way
by making more units but less
of a gold-backing or less
of a silver-backing or whatever.
And so you had this
consolidation of money
and the loss of these
complementary currencies.
And what happened
in 1290 was you
had your first kind of
depression take place in 250
years with this change
of the money system
to the equivalent of
what we have today.
And it was about 40
or 50 years later,
after 40 or 50 years of
an economic depression,
that the Black Plague
finally broke out.
But it wasn't something
that just happened.
It was due to this
economic collapse,
due to the change in
the monetary system that
led to the Black Plague,
which then devastated
Europe for over 150 years.
>>REGINA: Can you
make that link?
Draw the direct link
between scarcity--
I mean, obviously,
people weren't
able to take care of
themselves after this occurred.
>>BELGIN: Well, when you
lose that local currency that
was driving so much of their
economy and this velocity
of money, people were no
longer able to meet their needs
because they had to now buy into
a kind of a national currency
system.
And you had a lot
of local jobs lost.
The equivalent of
a liquidity issue
that happens today in
these booms and busts.
So with people no
longer having the means,
the currency to be able to
address their own local needs,
you had very quickly the--
>>REGINA: The decline.
>>BELGIN: --adding
to the Depression.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
yeah, and a decline
in health, mental
and physical, both.
>>BELGIN: Well, you had a
decline in every social system
in the country.
I mean, the area, in the region.
So all of this led to
this major collapse.
>>REGINA: And then we went
into a very dark phase.
>>BELGIN: Yes.
>>REGINA: Even though they
say a couple years after that,
roughly, we had the Renaissance.
But you mentioned earlier,
was that the true renaissance,
was during that golden age
of productivity that happened
during that 250-year period.
>>BELGIN: Correct.
In fact, during the
Renaissance, things were not--
the conditions were not
right for most people.
>>REGINA: Not women.
>>BELGIN: Certainly, not women.
That's when you had
such a deep repression.
I mean, it was actually
from the 1300s on that you
had this repression
of the feminine,
you had this, again,
unhealthy patriarchy
that took over every
system in that world,
and the collapse was--
again, money is not just money.
It's linked to everything else.
So the type of
money that they had
became a reflection
of what was possible
and what was not possible.
So you had a collapse
on major levels
at every aspect of society.
The Renaissance that took
place in 1400 or the late 1400s
and 1500s was not so
much a move forward.
It was a recognition of
what had been earlier
on during the Roman period.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BELGIN: It wasn't
really an advancement.
And certainly not an advancement
for women and for the feminine.
>>REGINA: Yeah, not societally.
OK, so then let's hop
forward from there to Europe
in the 1920s and 1930s,
and what began to happen.
And then the
reintroduction of some
of these complementary
currencies.
And also World War II, and
the rise of Hitler's regime.
So I'm going to--
because there are so many
questions, I just ask you
now one question, why
don't you go ahead and just
start laying a portrait
of that time for us
in Germany,
Switzerland, Austria?
>>BELGIN: Well, you know,
again, for me, a lot of this
is personal because of
what I grew up with.
And I struggled to understand
what the Depression was about
and if there were
anything that could have
been done to prevent
that or to prevent
a new occurrence of that.
And there is talk about
another Depression
taking place in our world.
And there's a lot
of reasons to think
that that's a possibility.
So let's look back
at what happened
during that horrific period.
One of the hardest hit countries
during that period was Germany.
They suffered from massive
hyperinflation during the 1920s
where their currency
was virtually worthless.
Unemployment was in
double-digit figures,
and there was really a
loss of understanding
how to get out of the
period that they were in,
the conditions
that they were in.
One town, this place
called Schwanenkirchen
was a coal mining town.
And the local coal mine had
just gone out of business.
And one of the workers
there tried to reopen it
but he couldn't use
the virtually worthless
national currency to do that.
So we got the workers
together, they said look,
let's reopen this mine,
but the only way we could
do that is by accepting
another type of currency,
a complementary currency
that they called the Wara.
And this currency would be
backed by the coal inventory
and that's how the
workers would get paid.
They accepted that.
They didn't really
have much choice.
It was the only way they can
get this mine reopen and go back
to work.
Within weeks, the local
shopkeepers in Schwanenkirchen
started accepting this
complementary currency.
Soon, over 2,000 businesses
around the country
started accepting payment in
Wara for services and goods.
In fact, a couple
of the banks even
started opening
up Wara accounts.
So here, in the middle
of the Great Depression,
one town was able to go from
almost full unemployment
to practically full employment
within a matter of weeks.
>>REGINA: Weeks.
>>BELGIN: Weeks.
>>REGINA: You're
saying, and I know
you've said before, this
can all actually turn around
very quickly once you have
the confidence of the people
to come on board with it.
>>BELGIN: And once
you have the tools.
>>REGINA: And once you
have the tools, so--
>>BELGIN: So try digging a
ditch with a hammer, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah, right.
>>BELGIN: So try
constructing an economy
with the monetary
equivalent of just a hammer.
It's virtually impossible.
>>REGINA: So what
happened to the Wara?
>>BELGIN: Well,
actually, its success,
its extraordinary success
also became its demise.
The Reichsbank at the time,
the German Central Bank,
became concerned about the
popularity of the Wara.
They saw it as a threat
to their own of hegemony
in the issuance of money.
And in 1933, along with some
other austerity measures
and contraction measures, they
made the complementary currency
illegal.
Within a matter of,
I think, a week,
Schwanenkirchen and
many other economies
that were beginning to use
these complementary currencies
went back to unemployment.
>>REGINA: So this type
of centralized control
that was brought
down upon them is
part of what you're calling
the unhealthy patriarchy
in our monetary systems?
I mean, obviously, fear
was driving it for one.
>>BELGIN: I would say fear
was driving part of it.
But I think mostly, it's
a lack of understanding
about these
complementary currencies.
In fact, we now know
that by making use--
and the reason they're called
complementary currencies,
they're not meant to replace
our national currency system.
Why would you get
rid of the hammer
when you have a paintbrush?
You want to use all the
tools available to us
where they're most
directly usable.
So what these complementary
currencies can do
is bolster up the
national currency system
and allow for a
full, healthy economy
to take place where the banks
and everybody are doing better.
>>REGINA: Then why would the
banks have felt threatened?
Obviously, it was working.
>>BELGIN: Well, they didn't
understand at that period--
I believe they simply
didn't understand.
They were looking short
term at something.
They didn't-- other piece to
this is that we'd now call this
period, looking back,
the Great Depression.
They didn't call it that then.
They didn't even know it
was a Depression back then.
It took years for
them to understand
that an actual Depression
was actually taking place.
So during that period,
they thought they just
had a minor dip in the economy.
They would figure it
out using that one
tool available to them, and
that things would normalize.
But in fact, they didn't.
And so I think that
they thought that
these complementary
currencies were
more of a problem than
a help to the global
or to the national
currency system.
Obviously, they were mistaken.
>>REGINA: Well, they're
mistaken to the point
that it allowed some
rather extraordinary things
to take place politically
as a result of it.
And if you're going to that.
>>BELGIN: Well, it was--
I have a hard time pronouncing
his name sometimes--
Hjalmar Schacht, who
became the first president
of the Reichsbank onto Hitler,
who later on would testify
that the reason that Hitler
was able to come into power
was due to unemployment
and poverty.
That's what brought
him to power.
People just ran out of--
the country ran out of
solutions in Germany
and they went to
the one person who
they thought could create
a national program that
would allow them to reemerge
from this horrific period
of no money and no jobs.
>>REGINA: A direct link to
the dissolution of the Wara.
>>BELGIN: Well, I
would say, I mean,
there were a couple
of measures that
were taken by the Reichsbank
that led to a shortage of money
available.
And these measures
including, especially
I would say, the loss of the
complementary currencies.
In 1933, elections took
place in Hitler and the Nazis
came into power.
That at the same
part, at that time,
the unemployment rose
to, I think, six million
or more people.
That was 33% of the
workforce were out of work.
That's what allowed
Hitler to come to power
and get this extraordinary
popularity behind him
in a country that was mostly
opposed to him prior to that.
I think his success prior
to that was 5% or 6%
of the population.
It was a marginal figure
up until the unemployment
rose to such an extent
that people ran out
of other solutions.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK, and we know the
rest of that story.
So now let's move
on into Switzerland
and what happened with their
complementary currency,
unless you want--
there's another point you
want to make here, go for it.
>>BELGIN: Yeah.
You know, people say,
well, that's one town
and it was one fluke incident.
Actually, it's not.
There were scores of
complementary currencies
available around the world
during the '20s and '30s.
We don't know the
results of all of them.
But one of them, most
documented of all
the complementary
currencies actually took
place in neighboring Austria.
And it was the Worgl
that took place.
And they copied in a sense
what happened in Wara.
And within weeks,
again, the city of Worgl
came to have full
employment, full employment
in a country that was suffering
from 30% unemployment.
And again, in the same repeat
of what took place in Germany,
the Central Bank of
Austria stepped in
and made these complementary
currencies illegal.
But before that
happened, a number
of economists from
around the world
started looking at what
was taking place in Worgl.
They also noticed that the
townspeople people there
in the middle of the
Depression, because
of their newfound
prosperity, were
starting to pay their taxes
earlier than anticipated.
>>REGINA: Isn't that amazing?
>>BELGIN: Because
they didn't even
know what to do with the
money that they were getting.
>>REGINA: So just take
care of the obligations,
get it off your
conscience first,
and there's plenty
left for living.
>>BELGIN: I mean,
it's extraordinary.
>>REGINA: Wouldn't
that be amazing
for us to feel that right now?
And we will get to that.
>>BELGIN: And let
me just say this.
One of the, in fact,
the economic superstar
of the early 20th century was
a man named Irving Fisher.
He was a Yale economist.
He, along with Russell Sprague
then from Harvard, yeah,
a Harvard economist, and then
under-secretary of the treasury
Dean Acheson all met
with President Roosevelt
when he came into the office.
And it was Irving
Fisher who said to FDR
that we could actually end the
Great Depression in the United
States in a matter
of three weeks
by the proper use of
complementary currencies.
>>REGINA: FDR said?
>>BELGIN: FDR was, it seemed
he was in favor of it,
but political allies
and advisors to FDR
thought that there would be
more political credit given
to the administration by
going ahead with the new deal.
Now, whatever else
was taking place
to hinder the use of the
complementary currencies,
we don't know, but we know that.
And so they went ahead
with the new deal but was,
as we know today, was not
the new deal that got us out
of the Depression.
It was actually our entry and
a preparation for World War II.
Well, today we're facing
dire circumstances.
There are so many
factors involved
that concern many
economists around the world.
And I think these lessons
of the Great Depression
would serve us in
good stead in terms
of moving forward in how we
deal with the issues of our day.
And the threat that's looming if
another depression takes place.
>>REGINA: Absolutely,
it seems a no-brainer.
But before we go
into some of that,
because I want to find
out how it's back to how
this thing actually works.
Let's go to Switzerland.
>>BELGIN: Well, in
the 1930s, right
around the period that
the Wara and the Worgl
were being eliminated in those
two respective countries,
Switzerland also noticed what
was taking place in Germany.
And 16 businessmen got
together, I think it was 1934,
and they were dealing with
the throes of the depression
there as well with this decline.
And when you have a
bust of the economy,
at the very moment that small
and medium sized enterprises
actually need credit
availability to them,
that's at the
moment when you have
these bust, that's when the
banks contract and they say no.
This is an unhealthy
business climate
and we're not lending
out money, although do so
at very exorbitant rates.
So with the lack of credit
available to businessmen,
these small and
medium-sized enterprises--
it's exactly what happened
during the 2007-2008 crisis--
without that money
available to them
to keep inventory to
continue business going,
these businesses bust.
They go out of business.
So Switzerland, these 16
businessmen got together
and they used a
variation of the Wara.
To keep their
enterprises going, they
would trade with one another
in a complementary currency,
this WIR, while the Swiss
national currency was
having difficulty.
So there was no
disruption of business.
They simply switched over
from one economy to the other.
They kept doing business
with one another.
When the economy normalized and
credit was available to them
again, they simply switched
back to the Swiss Franc.
>>REGINA: Makes all
the sense in the world.
>>BELGIN: Well, it does.
And it costs almost nothing
to put these things into play.
There's no loss of jobs,
no loss of businesses,
and it's far harder once a
business goes out of business
to recreate that enterprise.
So even if you're
struggling a little bit
to keep operations going,
it makes so much more sense.
And then you look
at 2006, 2007, 2008,
we don't know how
many jobs were lost.
They were in the
tens of millions
of jobs around the world.
Most of those jobs have
not come back, especially
for the small and
medium-sized businesses.
Most of those job
losses could and can
be prevented by making use,
again, by rethinking money,
by understanding that we
have these other tools.
So I think today, it would make
so much sense for the United
States and other industrialized
powers and the developing
world, all to
consider making use
of a program similar to the
WIR to just simply protect
to get these booms and busts
that take place periodically,
and not just periodically.
One figure that I found
fascinating by the World Bank
was that in one
25-year period alone,
from 1971 to 1995, the
World Bank documented
169 banking crises and something
like in 90 monetary crises
or one of the other.
We live in this economy
that's so unstable where
you can predict that
as soon as you start
to get a normal healthy
economy, something is going
to come in and undermine that.
Well, I think that
most of the undermining
takes place again
because we have
this one limited tool that we're
trying to do everything with.
To put protective measures
like the WIR in place
makes to make perfect sense.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>BELGIN: And you
know, this is one
of the most hard-nosed
capitalist societies on earth
and they're making use of
these complementary currencies.
Why shouldn't we?
>>REGINA: Why shouldn't we?
And there are cities
around America
that have tried doing this and
have been involved in this.
The first one that
pops to mind is Ithaca.
>>BELGIN: Yes, is
it the Ithaca HOURS?
>>REGINA: Yeah, Ithaca
dollars and others
that are under
consideration right now.
But what I don't
understand is how
does a complementary
currency come to be born?
I mean, is it asset-backed?
How do you create a
complementary currency?
>>BELGIN: Well, there's
many different ways.
Many of the complementary
occurrences,
there's thousands of
complementary currencies
in existence today.
Most of them are
already local level,
they make use of currencies
programs such as time bank,
time dollars--
>>REGINA: I love that.
>>BELGIN: And LETS, which is
Local Exchange Rate System.
There's these many
different forms
of complementary currencies
that can come into being.
All it requires, really, I
mean, many of these programs
are already up and running.
People can simply tune
into what is taking place
and develop a complementary
currency on their own as well.
Or they can partake in
the complementary currency
programs that already
exist on local levels.
Many countries today, because of
the dire economics of our time,
are beginning to
look at programs
such as the WIR
and other programs.
So there's many
different ways that
these complementary currencies
can come into being.
And again, there are all
of these different tools
available.
It will take a little
bit of orientation
to get people understand
how we can do this
but it's pretty simple.
>>REGINA: And so what
I'm hearing here,
it's not just one
thing as though you
would have tokens
for wheat in exchange
for a bushel of wheat once upon
a time as your security-backed
a local currency.
But now, you're
talking time banking,
you're talking people
hours, and energy,
and talents, and skills.
Not just a hard like
asset-backed currency.
>>BELGIN: Well, actually--
>>REGINA: It's a
basket of things.
>>BELGIN: You can
have many-- again,
there's many different
ways to do this.
But consider the fact that
our national currencies,
when people say,
what's going to back
our complementary currencies?
And they go, you know,
this doesn't seem possible.
Consider what backs our
national currencies.
>>REGINA: Yeah, nothing.
Air.
>>BELGIN: Air.
Actually, it's the
power of the word,
of an authority saying that
something is worth something.
Or this paper or these
electronic bits in the ethers
are actually valuable.
Well, what happens
when you begin
to have one recession
after another?
You begin to have
economic fragility,
that our trust in these
non-backed national currencies
begins to waver.
And so they're not
backed by gold,
they're not backed
by silver, they're
backed by the power of the word.
Now, consider what backs our
complementary currencies.
Many of our
complementary currencies
are actually backed by either
one asset or basket of assets.
It could be bushels of wheat.
It could be gold.
It could be silver.
It could be many different
things backing the currencies.
Or it could be backed
by people's willingness
to put in an hour's
time of work.
>>REGINA: Obviously,
time banking.
>>BELGIN: That's right.
>>REGINA: Right,
which is so beautiful.
I interviewed a woman
named Stephanie Rearick
a few years ago who is
deeply involved in that
along with others.
And I think it's in
Madison, Wisconsin,
is that where they're doing it?
>>BELGIN: Yes.
>>REGINA: And there was a few
thousand strong by that time,
but they were finding it
an incredible tool for also
social reform at all levels.
And not only that, they
had developed the software.
And she said to me,
hey, if you know anybody
that wants to get this
going in their communities,
we'll gladly donate
our software to them.
>>BELGIN: There's so many
people working at local levels
and they--
not only are they taking
care of their own communities
and many of the
needs that are not
being met by our regular or
national currency system.
But there's a mindset, a
worldview that goes along
with these complementary
occurrences where people just
want to help one another.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>BELGIN: And I think
that this is a major issue
in, you know, we look
at our current system
and we hear these very, very
powerful people talking about,
well, this is mine.
And there's such an
individual and myopic sense
of what our economy is about.
It's not all about
individual profit.
Individual profit is part of it.
Healthy competition is an
extraordinary, but so is
cooperation.
You can have both
in a society where
we're taking care
of our own needs
and we're taking care of the
collective needs of a country,
of a global economy.
And to have a
little bit of both,
and to have a balance
between these things,
I think is
extraordinarily important.
And most of the
societies looking back
at history that became
selfish, that became mostly
concerned about their
own requirements
without taking care of
the greater good, most
of those societies
have come and gone.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>BELGIN: So what we're
talking about here--
>>REGINA: You can't
endure if you're not
nurturing each other.
>>BELGIN: That's right.
That's right.
>>REGINA: And you're
talking-- what
you're talking about which
gets back to what you were
mentioning earlier about
the feminine principle,
this is about societal
nurturing, which is gone.
I mean, people are
suffering greatly.
I think of my son's generation
and younger, these kids, he
and his friends, I was
talking to the taxi driver
today as we were driving
in same with his son
and his son's friends, they
all have college degrees.
They're lucky if they can find
a job in the services industry.
They're trying to
get jobs as waiters.
I mean, biologists,
philosophers,
getting jobs as
waiters and you still
can't afford your own apartment.
If you can live
collectively, maybe you
can have a roof over your head.
It seems that they're
the generation that
are really going to want to
take this and run with it.
>>BELGIN: I pray and I also
have a great deal of empathy
for what this
millennial generation is
having to deal with.
I remember when I was
graduating from university back
in the early '70s,
I too, I mean,
even back then when there
were far more jobs available,
when they were actually
coming to the universities
and trying to hire us.
But even then, there
were an extraordinary,
for me, a lack of
choices of the things
that I cared about doing.
And there's so many
people today that
want to be contributing
to the greater good,
doing work in other
countries of the world,
helping in ways that they
can, this NGO movement.
It's extraordinary.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>BELGIN: And then when
I first met Bernard,
I was struggling
with understanding
how these complementary
currencies could possibly
help us.
And he said something to me that
has stuck with me ever since.
He said, look, consider
all of the work that really
needs to be done in our world--
the revitalization
of our cities,
our environments, rebuilding
our roads and bridges,
taking care of
educational needs,
the growing numbers of elders--
there's so much work that
needs to be accomplished.
Then there's this legion
of willing, able people,
hungry for work opportunities.
The only thing missing-- so you
have all the work that needs
to get done, you have all
these people willing to work--
the only thing
missing is this piece
of whatever, paper
or whatever it is,
that allows this to take place.
>>REGINA: Just that
currency of some kind.
>>BELGIN: That's right.
>>REGINA: And
that's where we are.
Just like it's just
add water, it's just
add some kind of useful
currency, and this is global.
And on that note, because
we're out of time,
we could talk for hours.
I want to thank
you so much, and I
have to say again to everybody.
I mean, this book, "New
Money for a New World,"
is an absolute must read.
And this is a story of hope.
>>BELGIN: Thank you.
>>REGINA: I thank you.
And again, thank everybody
else for joining us.
And thank you for
keeping an open mind.
[MUSIC PLAYING]